+++
title = 'Breaking Haag Duality'
date = 2025-11-16T15:12:30-06:00
draft = false
description = "It seems like Haag duality is broken for modular dressed observables in quantum gravity."
slug = ""
authors = ['yasin']
tags = ['physics-t']
categories = []
externalLink = ""
series = []
enableComments = true
+++
{{< katex >}}

## Haag Duality 
Haag Duality is the statement that, for some region \\(\mathcal O\\), the algebra of observables in that region, \\(\mathcal A(\mathcal O)\\) satisfy 

$$\mathcal A(\mathcal O\') = \mathcal A(\mathcal O\')$$ where \\(\mathcal O \'  \\) is the spatial complement and \\(\mathcal A (\mathcal O)\' \\) are all of the operators that commute with  \\(\mathcal A(\mathcal O)\\). In essence, this is saying that all of the fields in the complement region are generated by just taking the fields you have in the current region and taking a commutant. 

Generally, Haag Duality is taken to be a sense of a sensible "local" theory. Jon and friends wrote a [paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.03589) about this quite recently. Most nice theories we know of (free scalar, E&M, etc.) obey this condition. 

## The Problem 
In some work on an upcoming paper, me and some collaborators found that when we constructed diffeomorphism invariant observables by dressing with the modular Hamiltonian, Haag duality was broken. 

At first I thought I must have done a calculation wrong for our setup, but going back into the literature ([Witten](https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.12828), [JSS](https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.01837), and [KLS](https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.15897) ) this turns out to just be a general feature of this type of dressing. For some reason this hasn't been caught up until now and no one has made any comments about this (at least to my knowledge). 

An easy place to see this is in KLS with the AdS-Schwarzschild geometry. They find the von Neumann algebra of the right region, \\(\mathfrak{A}(\mathcal R) \\) (**Eq. 4.44**) and its commutant \\(\mathfrak{A}(\mathcal R) \' \\) (**Eq. 4.46**).  It is easy to directly construct \\(\mathfrak{A}(\mathcal L)\\), the algebra of the left region. The issue is 

$$\mathfrak{A}(\mathcal L) \neq \mathfrak{A}(\mathcal R)\'.$$

This seems to be an issue. In many *many* papers, both in QFT and especially holography, Haag duality is just *assumed* because it seems like such a physical and sensible property. 

Maybe it makes sense that it broken? Dressing with the modular Hamiltonian seems to be quite non-local. In terms of geometric modular flow, this usually looks like conjugating by an operator that is the stress-energy tensor integrated over a non-trivial region. It is worth wondering if Haag duality is broken no matter *what* we dress.

Hopefully there is some resolution to this we are just missing. Maybe we missed something that happens with the double commutant to fix this, I am not sure. There is an IAS conference coming up on Algebras in about 2 weeks where we plan to bring this up and hopefully we'll get comments there.

If Haag duality *is* actually broken, this seems like a problem.
